# Guestbook

Students, add something interesting below and submit a pull request. It might be
a (school appropriate) picture, quote, or other message. Be creative!

"In England, for instance, one may go to a concert of eighteenth-century music and walk out of the concert hall into a world of eighteenth-century architecture. Or one can attend university lectures on the Romantic Poets in rural surroundings of precisely the natural beauty that produced the Romantic Poets. Americans, on the other hand, are accustomed to consuming their culture in islanded meccas of preposterous elegance set down in an environment of unspeakable ugliness. Or they will attend university lectures on the Romantic Poets in rural surroundings that could only have produced Grant Wood and the Future Farmers of America. It is not at all unusual for us to drive for miles through a slurb landscape of Howard Johnson's, Jiffy Jumbo Burgers, Tastee-Freez, Piggly Wiggly, Totter-Inn, Etta's Clam Palace, Roger's Soul Food Eat-O-Rena, and the World's Largest Evangelical FM Station (Sacred Stereo) to attend a performance of Marlowe's Doctor Faustus in a civic center decorated with a variety of European marbles in colors ranging from pale peach to dahlia blue, elaborate chandeliers sweating with crystal, huge arched leaded windows, deep-toned plush-velvet carpets, massive sweeping staircases, and Edwardian palm trees encircled by tapestried love seats. At the end of the performance - which, more often than not, will be of excellent quality - we will leave behind this antic seraglio and drive back through those miles and those horrors without being troubled by any sense of incongruity whatever. And indeed perhaps we should not be, considering that the landscape and the kitsch décor of the theatre belong to the same world and are both equally irrelevant to the experience of the play itself." - In the Country of the Young, John W. Aldridge